Hello everybody and welcome back.
In this lecture we're going to make a simple shape by editing vertices edges and faces of our cube.
Okay so over in Blender here and the first thing we need to do if your screen does not look like this
if you've been playing around we're going to go to file new and general obviously save anything.
If you've been working on something you want to keep.
Now that we've done that how do we go into edit mode.
That's how we're going to start editing our mesh data.
So at the moment we're in object mode and we need to be an edit mode.
So if we go up to the top left of the 3D view where it says object mode one of the options there is
edit mode.
And what we can also do is we can hit the tab key to go in and out of edit mode and you will see that
the screen and the overlays change ever so slightly especially the tool shelf on the left whilst you're
in edit mode.
You can move the position of any vertex edge or face but you need to make sure that you are able to
select it first.
How do we do that.
Well in the top left.
We have next to the edit mode.
We have our vertex select, edge select and face select toggles.
Now you can hold down shift and toggle them all on and that will enable blender to smart select what
you're actually doing so if you click on an edge you'll select an edge of vertex of vertex and a whole
face.
It will select the face for this whole section you may want to keep those toggled on.
So when you're editing something you don't have to keep switching backwards and forwards as your models
get much more dense.
However it can be very difficult if you don't explicitly tell blender what you're trying to select to
select it which can be very very annoying.
Now just like when we're in object mode we can transform the entire object where we're edit mode we
can transform whatever we have selected.
So with this whole face selected I can press the S key to scale and then scale up the entire face.
And now if we move around we see we've got a new object one that you cannot create.
If you were in object mode it'd be very difficult too.
Now I'm going to undo that for the moment and select everything with the A key.
When I do that I'm going to scale everything by two and just press enter to confirm that.
Now we have a resize operator panel popped up on the lower left.
If you caught that come up.
So we can still edit our last operation if we want to.
But the one key thing that I want to get in right from the very beginning is that we are editing the
mesh data itself.
We are not transforming the Object data.
Now that may sound a bit confusing at first but if we go out back into object mode and open up the 3D
windows properties we see that with this object selected this cube the scale is still one even though
we've scaled the original cube by two.
So that means it really is this size.
We're not just making something larger in this control panel.
It really is that size and this will matter a lot later on when it comes to using modifiers when it
comes to the physics engine when it comes to particle systems.
And that's why in the last lecture we were talking about applying your transforms the number one tip
that I can give you is if you were going to do something like scaling rotating or moving in some cases
do it in edit mode.
Now the important take home there is basically if you're doing any editing often it's easier to do it
in edit mode than you have to remember about applying things afterwards.
So I'm going to go ahead and just undo those moves that I've done before and now what we can do is we
can think about moving it to logical places so I can go and view this from the side.
Now what we can do here is we can make this sits on the ground so we go G Z two that will lift it up.
And when I say the ground I mean where Z equals zero.
So were the X and Y pass the Z.
That is where Z equals zero.
So now the bottom of the cube is notionally at the bottom of the world.
If it goes any lower than that we could say it's under the ground level of the world or has a negative
Z value.
What else can we do.
Well whilst we've got all of them selected up here we can click an edge and go G Y and move it along
and make some really funky shapes.
I didn't mean Y there when I selected that edge.
I meant X.
So let's go to G X and pull it out like that and then we can grab this edge here and go G Z and you can
start to make some really unique shapes.
Now we're gonna make the operator panel a little smaller since we don't have much screen space anyway
and you can select these vertex edge and face select with the one two and three key.
Now there is a caveat to that if you happen to have emulate number pad turned on which is on the preferences
input emulate number pad.
That won't work.
You'll need to turn that off if you want to use the 1,2, 3 keys to switch between vertex edge and
face select, So now we've played around with moving our faces edges and vertices around it's time
to solidify that knowledge and practice it in this quick challenge. Okay so your challenge.
I'd like you to create a simple wedge with the following dimensions X 2, Y 4,  Z 2.
And with no overlapping vertices.
So that means it's gonna be two wide four long and two meters tall and as a bonus sieve can get it like
the pictures beneath.
So keep the origin at 0 0 0 and then match the following.
So that is the tallest part of our wedge is where Y equals zero no part of the wedge is negative Y.
And the end of the wedge where it's at its narrowest is where Y equals 4.
Pause the video now and give that a go. Okay everybody , Welcome back.
Let's go ahead and create our first wedge.
Okay so we're back over in Blender and I'm gonna get rid of everything that I've got here i'm just going to
start up a new blend file.
Okay so I'm gonna hop straight into edit mode.
The first thing I want to say before we start moving things around is there's going to be more than
one way to do this.
Just bear that in mind if you've taken a different route.
Don't worry as long as you've got the right shape at the end of it you've succeeded.
Now just bear in mind here the positive Y direction we can see by looking at the Gizmo in the top right.
This shows the Y direction going to our right which means that's the positive way Z going up and X
coming slightly towards us.
So we've already got it in the right X position but we just need to move it up by one meter on the Z
so I'm gonna go G Z 1, Okay I'm going to select an edge Select and Select this very top edge and pull
it forward.
So G Y by 2 and then G Z minus 2 and we've got our basic shape I'm then going to select everything and
I'm going to use the A key for that.
Select all and I'm going to go G Y.
I think it's just one blender unit which will get us there.
And there we go we've got everything there and no overlapping vertices and there we go that's the wedge
all done.
Now there's one comment I want to make straight away and that is unnecessary geometry during the
making of this wedge we left this edge just down at the bottom.
That was a necessity to make sure that we don't have any duplicate vertices anywhere but it's actually
a bit of wasted geometry.
And in general you'll want to try to avoid that.
In this case since we're just beginning I call that acceptable.
And there we go.
We'll find out how we can get rid of things like this later on but for the moment I'm happy with how
that looks.
How did you guys get on.
Have you made your straightforward wedge please do share your work.
Did you go about it a different way.
I'd love to hear your techniques over in the discussions.
So share over there and I'll see you all in the next lecture.